# volume3-project
Predicting Success Factors in Utah High Schools
Michael Stafford, Tyler Sanders, Andrew Cherpeski, Alex Melo, and Samuel McIntyre

Proper placement and funding of high schools is paramount to their ultimate success in serving the educational needs of students. The success of a high school may be measured by graduation rate, standardized test scores, or college placement rates. The reality of a typical student’s education may be influenced by a multitude of factors including economic factors, parental education, distance to the school, and more. We will investigate what demographic factors are most highly correlated with school success in a given area in order to help the state of Utah determine how to fund and where to place its schools.
Our primary source of demographic data will be the US census data corresponding to the state of Utah. This dataset includes demographic data at the county level including race, education, income, age, population, household size, and more. Our education data comes from both Utah state and national government agencies. This data includes high school class size, budgets, and student and teacher populations, as well as ACT scores, SAT scores, and graduation rates.
Using regression, we will train a model using randomly selected high schools in Utah along with the area’s demographic data from the US census in order to predict standardized test scores and graduation rates as a measure of success. We will also develop a success index that combines test scores and graduation rates in order to categorize high schools. Finally, we will use the regression and random forest models to predict the success metrics of a hypothetical high school given its placement, surrounding demographics, and realistic conditions and budget. We will also determine feature importance using the random forest. We will then use the remaining high school and demographic data in order to validate our model’s performance. Model success will be characterized by examining the residuals of least squares, Oob error of the forest, predictive success of the models based on a test/train split of the data.
Andrew and Michael will focus on data acquisition as well as model validation. Samuel and Alex will take charge of data cleaning. Alex will be in charge of setting up a Github repository. Tyler will lead out the writing of the report and help with data cleaning. We will build the models together as a team. Most importantly, Michael will be head of the snack division.
Ultimately, we will determine the factors, both those that can and cannot necessarily be controlled by the state, that are most correlated with successful educational outcomes for students. Although our model cannot determine a causal relationship within the data, it can be a starting point for future research to examine causality and can help to guide the state of Utah in its future funding and placement of high schools throughout the state in order to better serve the state’s students.



